MIL-A-83577B

3.2.2 Deployables

Kick-off springs or other suitable devices shall, where practicable, be used to initiate deployment motion. 

These springs shall have a stroke long enough to ensure complete disengagement of the deployable from its retention mechanism.


3.2.8 

Helical springs shall be in accordance MIL-S-13572 and MIL-STD-29.

Helical compression springs are preferred to helical tension springs.

Helical compression springs shall, where practicable, be enclosed or otherwise captivated to prevent buckling, and to provide motive power even if broken.

The attachments for retaining leaf springs shall be designed to reduce stress concentrations by such features as rounding of sharp corners or keeping mounting holes away from highly stressed areas. 

Spring design shall consider fatigue life and the effects of temperature on spring performance. 

To reduce the possibility of a reduction of potential energy due to creep, springs which are stored in a stressed condition shall be designed to maintain stress levels below the material proportional limit. 

Redundant springs, capable of working independently, shall be used in all applications, where practicable. 

When minimum friction is desirable, springs shall be dry film lubricated. 

The dry film lubricant shall be selected to avoid corrosion, and shall not contain carbon or powdered metal.


3.3.3 Single Point Failures

Single point failure modes for moving mechanical assemblies and their component parts shall be avoided, where practicable. 
This requirement may be implemented by such means as use of redundant springs or motors in deployment mechanisms so that failure of one spring or motor does not prevent full deployment and latching.


3.3.6 Margins

In spring driven mechanisms where redundant springs are used instead of a backup deployment mechanism, the mechanism shall have a positive torque or force margin for a one-spring-out case based on combining worst case conditions. 

In the event of a broken spring, the remaining system margin estimate shall include resistive forces or torques which could be generated by the broken spring.

3.7.5.2 Space Transportation System Payloads

For all moving mechanical assemblies and deployables that are in payloads which are to be launched by the Space Transportation System (STS), the safety requirements shall also be in accordance with Chapter 2 of NHB 1700.7 (NASA). 

For these minimum number of failures and operator errors determined by the consequence of any hazardous functions. 
For catastrophic
hazards or hazards that would result in personnel injury, loss of the orbiter, or loss of STS facilities and equipment, the hazard shall be controlled such that no combination of two failures, operator errors, or radio frequency signals would unleash the hazard. 

For critical hazards or hazards that would result in damage to STS equipment or in the use of contingency or emergency procedures, the hazard needs to be controlled such that no single failure, or operator error, would unleash the hazard. 

Hazardous functions are thereby controlled with either two or three inhibits for critical or catastrophic hazards, respectively. 

These requirements are not applicable to noncredible failures where extensive analysis and test programs assure high reliability in the design. 

In particular, structural failures and the failure of spring elements which meet all structural design and design verification requirements are considered such noncredible failures.

4.3.5 Inspection of Assemblies

These inspection processes shall include, but are not limited to, the following:

m. Springs. 
Where accessibility permits, the following inspections and measurements shall be made on springs: inspection for broken coils or other damage and measurement of spring force or torque and spring rate on the fully assembled moving mechanical assembly. 
The spring load at the installed position and the spring rate shall be measured before assembly, recorded, and the springs properly serialized. 
The spring load and the spring rate shall also be measured and recorded after spring assembly or installation, as appropriate. 
The location of each serialized spring on the moving mechanical assembly shall be recorded. 
On all springs comprising single point failures, the heat treat shall be checked, where practicable, using an unstressed portion of each spring, such as on the ground flats on the ends of compression springs. 
Where there is a danger of causing damage as a result of the heat treat test, a lot sampling technique may be used if approved by the contracting officer. 
Where practicable, actual spring position and deflected shape during the entire range of travel shall be checked to avoid off-nominal loading due to coil displacement and tang movement

4.6 Component and Subsystem Level Acceptance Tests

For spring driven devices, torque vs angle measurements shall be made during restowing as well as during deployment in order to generate a torque vs angle hysteresis curve to determine torque margin.

For linear devices, equivalent linear measurements shall be made to determine force margin. 

As a minimum, these measurements shall be made under ambient and acceptance level hot and cold temperatures.

Moving mechanical assemblies that contain redundancy in their design shall, where practicable, demonstrate performance to their requirements in each redundant mode of operation.

